In graphics editing programs, the stretching tool is one of the most basic, fundamental, and intuitive tools available. Geometrically, stretching shapes multiplies the area. For instance, if you stretch a shape until it doubles in length, the area also doubles.

This is true not just for horizontal stretching and vertical stretching, but stretching in any direction. **Click and drag in the interactive below to stretch the square in the desired direction.** If you wanted to, you could replace the square with any other 2D shape.

<center><iframe src="https://editor.p5js.org/pyrbgle/embed/EWH_vHUdM" style="width:600px;height:600px;border:none;"></iframe></center>

But what does stretching do to a shape's perimeter? Unlike area, we can give no exact answer. The best we can do is provide an upper bound: **if you stretch a shape in a given direction by a given amount, the perimeter will grow by less than that amount.** Here's an explanation of this by example. Imagine stretching a shape horizontally so it's twice as long, and then stretching it vertically so it's twice as tall. We end up with an exact copy of the shape we started out with, but one that's doubled in size. Therefore, the perimeter will have also doubled. That means that only doing the first step (stretching the shape horizontally so it’s twice as long) without the second step (stretching the shape vertically so it’s twice as tall) will less than double the perimeter.

For multiple stretches, there is a similar result. It turns out that after you stretch a shape multiple times in multiple directions there will always be a single direction that stretches the most and a single direction that stretches the least. In the interactive above, you can see these directions as the axes of the ellipse that encircles the shape. The directions are called the **singular vectors** and their lengths are called the **singular values**. “Singular” here basically means "single", "lone", "one only". There is a "single" largest vector and a "single" smallest vector.

**It will always be the case that perimeter grows by more than the smallest singular value and by less than the largest singular value.** The reason is simple. If the shape was stretched uniformly, i.e. in all directions, by the amount of the largest singular value, the perimeter would also grow by this amount. But some directions are stretched less (for example, the smallest singular vector) and so the perimeter is also smaller. The same reasoning explains why perimeter grows by more than the smallest singular value.

The singular values are the tightest possible bounds on perimeter growth. The actual perimeter growth can vary freely within these bounds depending on the kinds of stretches you do. In other words, t’s possible to stretch a shape in multiple ways and end up with the same singular values, but get different perimeter growths.

One interesting property of the singular vectors is that they’re always perpendicular. As a result, if the shape is very elongated,  one singular value will be much larger compared to the other singular value. In turn, this means that the lower and upper bounds on perimeter are very far apart. In other words, the more elongated a shape gets during stretching, the worse the perimeter bounds get.